# Æternity consensus protocol

This document defines the Æternity consensus protocol.

## Introduction

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to
be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

## Notation

- `x || y`, x concatenated with y
- `sk <- rand(1^n)`, sample a random n bit number

## Overview

### Blockchain

A blockchain is a specific instance of a distributed ledger made up from
blocks, which are arranged  as a tree with the root of the tree being the
`genesis block`. Each node in this tree has exactly one `parent` but can have
multiple children. Blocks specify their parent via the `prev_hash` field in
the block header, with the genesis block having a `prev_hash` of all `0`.

At any point, the `block height` is the distance from the current valid `top`
block to the genesis block. The genesis block has height zero.

A valid block here means valid according to the consensus rules described
below.

We use temporary random leader to build the tree of blocks.

In order to find the best valid chain given a tree of blocks, every node
operator in the network sums the amount of work (see Proof of Work) done on
each chain. The best valid chain is then the chain that has the most work
done. Any ties here will be resolved by the time a block was received at,
i.e. it will prefer the block it received first.


### Blocks

This document depends on [Bitcoin-NG protocol][ng] that describes rules for building blockchain.

Bitcoin NG introduces two types of blocks:

1. Key Blocks - Key Blocks carry a Public Key of a leader and Proof-of-Work
   evidence and associated metadata
2. Micro Blocks - Micro Blocks carry transactions confirmed by a leader and
   associated metadata

There may be `0-N` Micro Blocks between two Key Blocks. Micro Blocks are small and they are produced very often i.e. every three seconds.

Key Blocks are generated by miners. Ten new coins are [introduced by each Key Block][ng-rewards].
Micro Blocks are generated by miners who become leaders by mining Key Blocks.

#### Genesis block

The genesis block is special in the sense that it does not have a parent and
contains the initial state of the Æternity blockchain. Part of initial state
is generated from the distribution of the Æternity ERC20 token on the
Ethereum blockchain.


### Transactions

Æternity follows the "fat protocol" approach, which means that the protocol
itself has many features built in, as opposed to e.g. Ethereum, which maps
any functionality beyond basic transactions changing the state of an
account to smart contracts.

### Proof of Work

[Cuckoo Cycle](https://github.com/tromp/cuckoo) is the algorithm used for proof of work.
It was designed to prevent the dynamics that have developed in Bitcoin and
similar systems, where the mining operations are dominated by special purpose
hardware. The problem being solved is that of finding cycles in a bipartite graph.

Proof of work is used for leader election, which happens via key blocks in
Bitcoin-NG. Micro blocks do not require any proof of work.

### Accounts

### P2P network

The peer-to-peer network is not part of the consensus and will be described in a separate document.

### Coins and tokens

#### Aeons

Aeon is the main coin used in the Æternity system. We use the following denominations:

```
1
1_000
1_000_000
1_000_000_000
1_000_000_000_000
1_000_000_000_000_000
1_000_000_000_000_000_000 | aeon
```

## Specification

### Crypto

Blake2b (256 bits digest) and ed25519

#### Keys

Key generation is done according to [RFC8032](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8032#page-13),
note that we have 64-byte secret keys that consists of the seed concatenated
with the public key in order to [save CPU cycles when
signing](https://download.libsodium.org/doc/public-key_cryptography/public-key_signatures.html)
The public key is 32 byte.

#### Signatures

ECDSA, DER encoding (~72 bytes in size)

## Accounts

```
address: public key
balance:
nonce:
```

### Blocks

#### Key Blocks

```
PROTOCOL_VERSION: 22
GENESIS_VERSION: 22
```

- the timestamp of a key block MUST be smaller than `now() + 9m`
- the timestamp of a key block MUST be bigger than:
  - the median timestamp of the last 11 blocks (if height >= 12)
  - the timestamp of the genesis block (if height <= 11)
- the version MUST match the `PROTOCOL_VERSION`
- the `pow_evidence` MUST be valid
- MUST have `0 <= nonce <= MAX_NONCE`
- txs_hash MUST be correct root hash of the merkle tree of all transactions.
- ***TODO***: fill in missing rules

Header [serialization format](../serializations.md#key-blockheader)

Block [serialization format](../serializations.md#key-block)

#### Micro Blocks

```
PROTOCOL_VERSION: 22
GENESIS_VERSION: 22
```

- the timestamp of a micro block MUST be smaller than `now() + 9m`
- if the previous block is a micro block:
  - the timestamp MUST be bigger than or equal to the timestamp of the previous block + 3s
- if the previous block is a key block:
  - the timestamp MUST be bigger than the timestamp of the previous block
- the version MUST match the `PROTOCOL_VERSION`
- the signature must be a valid signature produced by the issuer of
  the previous key block
- the sum of gas of transactions in a micro block MUST be lower or equal to
  the gas limit per micro block
- ***TODO***: fill in missing rules

Header [serialization format](../serializations.md#micro-block-header)

Block [serialization format](../serializations.md#micro-block)


### Transactions

#### Signed transaction

```
 Fieldname       Size (bytes)
 -------------- -----
| data         | var |
 -------------- -----
| signatures   | var |
 -------------- -----
```

MUST have valid signature from private key belonging to `sender`.

#### Common fields for transactions

Each (on-chain) transaction has the following fields:
* Fee. It MUST be at least `1` (*10^-18) aeons.
* Time to live (TTL).

#### Spend

```
 Fieldname       Size (bytes)
 -------------- -----
| sender       | 32  |
 -------------- -----
| recipient    | 32  |
 -------------- -----
| amount       | 8   |
 -------------- -----
| fee          | 8   |
 -------------- -----
| nonce        | 8   |
 -------------- -----
```

#### Gas

In order to control the size and the number of transactions in a micro block,
each transaction has a gas. The sum of gas of all the transactions cannot
exceed the gas limit per micro block, which is 6 400 000 (***TODO***: this
value is likely to change before the mainnet release).

The gas of a transaction is the sum of:
* the base transaction gas (15 000 ***TODO***: likely to change)
* the byte size of a serialized transaction multiplied by the gas per byte
  (20 ***TODO***: likely to change)
* the gas that is needed for contract execution (this only applies to the
  contract create and contract call transactions)

***TODO***: the gas of a spend transaction with payload is not supposed to
have the same gas as e.g. an oracle transaction of the same size. The gas of
transactions is subject to change before the mainnet release.

### Proof of Work

```
HIGHEST_TARGET_SCI: 0x2100ffff
HIGHEST_TARGET_INT: 0xffff000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
NONCE_BITS: 64
MAX_NONCE: 0xffffffffffffffff
EXPECTED_BLOCK_MINE_RATE: 60 * 3 # every 3 minutes
RECALCULATE_DIFFICULTY_FREQUENCY: 10
```

[Cuckoo cycle](https://github.com/tromp/cuckoo) is used as the proof of work
algorithm. Solutions take the form of arrays length `l`, where `l` is the length
(`PROOFSIZE`) of the cycle in the bipartite graph. The size of the graph is denoted
by [`the 2-log of the graph size, which is the size in bits of the node identifiers`](https://github.com/tromp/cuckoo/blob/488c03f5dbbfdac6d2d3a7e1d0746c9a7dafc48f/src/cuckoo.h#L11) `EDGEBITS`. The difficulty
of a graph with `M` nodes and `N` edges is based on the ratio `M/N`, with the standard
implementation being fixed at `M/N = 1/2`. Please refer to the [whitepaper](https://github.com/tromp/cuckoo/blob/master/doc/cuckoo.pdf?raw=true) for more details. These indices are refered to as `micrononces`, not
to be confused with the nonce included in the header itself.
This graph is generated by hashing every edge `i in (0..N)` twice with a keyed hash
function `h` ([SipHash](https://131002.net/siphash/)). The `key` used for these operations
is the hash of a block header plus a nonce. The first node belonging to every edge is
given by hashing `h(key, index*2)` and the second by `h(key, index*2+1)`.

Current defaults:

```
PROOFSIZE: 42
EDGEBITS: 28
```


```
header = version || height || prev_hash || state_hash || miner || beneficiary || target || evidence || nonce || time
           64         64         256          256         256         256          64       42*32       64       64
```

For the purpose of computing a proof of work puzzle solution, the evidence and
nonce are set to `[0] * 42` and `0` respectively, since neither are available
before the puzzle has been solved.

When a node receives a new key block it must repeat the process, setting
evidence and nonce to all 0, in order to be able to validate the proof of work.

```
h_header = Blake2b(header)
```

The default `key` for cuckoo is 80 bytes long. The `nonce` here is expressed
in little-endian notation, to keep consistent with cuckoo cycle, which does
the same.

```
key = h_header || nonce || 0..0
        256        64      192
```


A valid solution MUST:

- be encoded according to the solution encoding rules
- form a cycle (***TODO: make this more precise***)
- only contain `micrononces < 2^EDGEBITS - 1`
- have micrononces in ascending order
- pass the difficulty check


#### Solution Encoding Rules

Since `EDGEBITS <= 32`, we can encode an edge as a 32bit integer, otherwise
it would have to be 64 bits. Therefore a solution is currently `[u32; 42]`.


#### Difficulty target

See [Chapter 9 of the cuckoo cycle paper](https://github.com/tromp/cuckoo/blob/master/doc/cuckoo.pdf?raw=true):

> For further control, a difficulty target 0 < T < 2^256 is introduced, and
> we impose the additional constraint that the Blake2b 256 bit digest of the
> cycle nonces in ascending order be less than T, thus reducing the success
> probability by a factor of 2^256.

Thus we adopt the target notion from Bitcoin and also use the same way to
express it.

The target threshold relates to another value: the difficulty. This is
proportional to the hardness of the PoW task:

```
difficulty = <target of difficulty 1> / target
```

a floating point value.

Bitcoin uses `0x00000000FFFF0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000`\
as Difficulty 1 target (`0x1d00ffff` in scientific notation, see below). For
Cuckoo Cycle we need a lighter filtering of solutions than for SHA-256 as the
basic algorithm is much slower than a simple hash generation, so we use the
largest possible value: `0xFFFF000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000`
(`0x2100ffff` in scientific notation) as difficulty 1.

We store the current target threshold in the block header in scientific
notation.
Difficulty is used to select the winning fork of new blocks: the difficulty of a chain of blocks is the sum of the difficulty of each block.

Integers represented in scientific notation:
`2^24 * <base-2 exponent + 3> + the first 3 most significant bytes` (i.e.,
the [significand](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Significand)).
The + 3 corresponds to the length of the significand (i.e., the int value is
`0.<significand> * 8^<exponent>`).
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Difficulty#How_is_difficulty_stored_in_blocks.3F)


#### Target adjustment

Some concepts:

```
Difficulty = HIGHEST_TARGET / Target
Rate       = Capacity / Difficulty  (blocks/ms)
Capacity   = number of potential solutions per ms generated by miners

DesiredTimeBetweenBlocks = aec_governance:expected_block_mine_rate()
DesiredRate              = 1 / DesiredTimeBetweenBlocks
```

The basic idea of the algorithm is to estimate the current network capacity
based on the `N` (= 17) previous blocks and use that to set the new
target:

```
NewDifficulty = EstimatedCapacity / DesiredRate
NewTarget     = HIGHEST_TARGET / NewDifficulty
              = HIGHEST_TARGET * DesiredRate / EstimatedCapacity
```

We can estimate the network capacity used to mine a given block `i` as

```
EstimatedCapacity[i] = Difficulty[i] / MiningTime[i]
MiningTime[i]        = Time[i] - Time[i - 1]
```

The estimated capacity across all `N` blocks is then the weighted (by time)
average of the estimated capacities for each block. Note, since `MiningTime[i]`
require `Time[i - 1]` and we do not use the genesis block timestamp in target
adjustment we cannot start using the target estimation until block `N + 2 (= 19)`.

```
EstimatedCapacity = Sum(EstimatedCapacity[i] * MiningTime[i]) / TotalTime
                  = Sum(Difficulty[i]) / TotalTime
                  = Sum(HIGHEST_TARGET / Target[i]) / TotalTime
```

To get a good trade-off between response time and stability we use a variant of
[DigiShield](https://github.com/zawy12/difficulty-algorithms/issues/9).
That means we compute a tempered TotalTime (total solve time in algorithm description):

```
TotalTime'        = Sum(SolveTime[i])
SolveTime[i]      = max(-FTL, min(6 * DesiredTimeBetweenBlocks, Time[i] - Time[i-1]))
TemperedTotalTime = 0.75 * N * DesiredTimeBetweenBlocks + 0.2523 * TotalTime
```

Where FTL = Future Time Limit - i.e. the time a block is allowed to be
"from the future". We use 9 minutes (540 s) i.e. 3 times the `DesiredTimeBetweenBlocks`.

Now, the problem is that we can't do any floating point arithmetic (to
ensure the calculation can be verified by other nodes), so we pick a
reasonably big integer K (= HIGHEST_TARGET * 2^32) and compute

```
EstimatedCapacity ≈ Sum(K * HIGHEST_TARGET div Target[i]) / TotalTime / K
TemperedTotalTime ≈ (3 * N * DesiredTimeBetweenBlocks) div 4 + (2523 * TotalTime') div 10000
```

Then

```
NewTarget = HIGHEST_TARGET * DesiredRate / EstimatedCapacity
          ≈ HIGHEST_TARGET * DesiredRate * TotalTime * K / Sum(K * HIGHEST_TARGET div Target[i])
          ≈ DesiredRate * TotalTime * K / Sum(K div Target[i])
          ≈ TotalTime * K div (DesiredTimeBetweenBlocks * Sum(K div Target[i]))
```

[ng]: ./bitcoin-ng.md
[ng-rewards]: ./bitcoin-ng.md#rewards
